Bare to Brilliant in Thirty Minutes
a Makeup Tutorial for the Cosmetically Challenged
By Kylie Hensley,
hensleykb@goldmail.etsu.edu
December 2, 2015
“Makeup is part of my daily routine. It’s the time in my mornings when I can
concentrate on me, and me alone. Giving yourself that kind of attention is so
important—and is something that is glossed over by too many women.”
–Kat Von D, American Tattoo Artist and Creator of Sephora’s Kat Von D Beauty
About the Author
Kylie Hensley grew up in Johnson City, Tennessee and
is an English major pursuing teaching licensure at East
Tennessee State University. Since she was a kid, Kylie
has always loved makeup and all things glittery. Kylie
has done extensive research on professional makeup
application and seeks to offer women helpful hints on
how to achieve a flawless but natural and healthy look
using many different tools and products.
How do I know what kind of foundation to use? What’s the difference between
liquid and gel eyeliner? Where am I supposed to apply bronzer? What is highlighter? And
for goodness’ sake, how on earth do I get it all to stay on through an eight-hour work
day?
Ladies, if you are confused by the modern application methods of makeup, know
you are not alone. With all of the different YouTube tutorials and the elusively vague
Pinterest links floating around on the internet, nailing down a beauty routine can be
perplexing and frustrating—especially if you have never been educated in the magical
realm of cosmetics. But fear not! You are just a few simple tips away from understanding
makeup and what will work best for you…as long as you’re willing to spend a little extra
time on your beauty routine in the mornings!
My name is Kylie Hensley and I love makeup and other girly things. I want to tell
you everything I know simply because I think every woman should have the opportunity
to feel confident and beautiful. However, I am aware that makeup is most certainly not
for everyone. If you hate makeup and the very thought of putting foreign goo on your
face makes your skin crawl, then this tutorial is not for you. However, if you love
makeup as much as I do, read on and prepare to love the skin you’re in!
2
Brushes, Sponges, Tools, Oh My!
Before you even think about even the beginning stages of your beauty routine, you’re
going to want to stock up on some quality brushes and other tools. Having professional materials
is important, especially for women who are new to makeup, because even if you’re a total
novice, simply having the right tools will improve your makeup game by 100%. There are
endless amounts and different types of makeup brushes and they all do different things.
However, I’m just going to show you the basics to get started.
The first brush you’ll want to invest in is a stippled
foundation brush. This brush is made specifically for applying
liquid foundation. If you’ve been using your fingers, please just
stop. Pick up one of these guys instead. Your foundation coverage
will improve noticeably with this brush. You can thank me later.
Next, invest in a quality bronzer brush. You need a
brush specifically for bronzer simply because it should not be
applied in the same way as foundation or blush. A bronzer
brush will give you an effortless glow without making you look
muddy.
This brush is going to be used for loose powder or finishing
powder. You don’t want powder clumping together on your face, so
do yourself a favor and invest in a loose powder brush!
3
You also need—yes, need—a kabuki brush. It’s magical. It
can be used for just about anything but I use it to blend my contour,
highlight, and blush together and for one last buff and sweep when
I’m done with it all. Aside from just being awesome at what it
does, it’s also pillowy soft like I imagine clouds would be.
This is a concealer brush. You need one because none of
us have perfect skin (if you’re one of the few who do, know that I
hate you) and we all break out sometimes. This brush will apply
your favorite concealer like a dream so that you won’t fret about
people staring at Mount McKinley on your face.
There are dozens of different types of eyeshadow brushes,
but if you’re just starting out, all you need is a standard issue
shadow brush. It does everything from packing on colors to
blending out the crease colors, so you’ll be set with this for a while.
Behold, the return of the makeup sponge! This bad boy is only $5
at Walmart and can do everything my very expensive makeup brushes
can do, only better. Not only is this thing so soft that it’s probably made
of whatever babies’ butts are made of, but it makes me look like an
airbrushed porcelain doll. Seriously, get one of these.
4
Step One: Prepare Your Skin!
First, decide if your skin is oily or dry. The very first thing you must do to prepare your
skin for cosmetics is decide whether your skin is oily or dry. Doing this will help you decide
what types of cosmetics to buy. Does your face often look shiny (not in a glittery Cullen-esque
way, either) throughout the day? Does your liquid makeup tend to “sweat” off easily? If so, your
skin is probably oily. Does your face feel tight in the mornings and after showers? Do your lips
chap easily? If this is the case, you probably have dry skin. Everyone’s skin is different, so get to
know yourself and how your skin works. Knowing what kind of skin you have will determine
many other things about your beauty routine, such as the cleansers, moisturizers, and makeup
products you choose.
Next, choose a cleanser and moisturizer. Time to do some research! Read reviews and
critiques and figure out what other ladies with your skin type are using. I have dry skin, and I
recommend Aveeno’s Positively Radiant Skin Brightening Daily Scrub ($8, Walgreens and other
drugstores) and Aveeno’s Clear Complexion Daily Moisturizer ($12, Walgreens and other
drugstores). These products work for ladies with oily skin too, but they are especially effective
for those of you with skin like mine. By the way, YES, ladies, you do need to moisturize. Excess
oil on your face is your skin’s way of over-compensating because it’s dehydrated, so moisturize
like your life depends on it! If your skin is dry, be sure to choose a cleanser that also exfoliates
such as Clinique Exfoliating Scrub ($21, Sephora and Ulta). All the moisturizer in the world
won’t help if you don’t buff away the dry, flaky skin. Don’t exfoliate every day, though! Too
much of anything isn’t good for you, and you don’t want to tire your skin out from too much
exfoliation.
5
Step Two: Primer, Foundation, and Concealer
Start with a clean, moisturized and primed face. Before you slather on that foundation
like sunscreen, you’re going to want to prime your skin.
Primer evens your skin tone, reduces the appearance of pores,
and generally just makes your makeup stay in place longer. I
use Photo Finish Primer by Smashbox ($16, Sephora and
Ulta) and it has revolutionized the way my makeup looks!
This particular primer is a clear gel that you apply to your
entire face. Smashbox also makes different types of primers that correct color (if you have
bruising or scarring), prevent breakouts, and hydrate the skin. Choose the one that best suits your
specific needs, but primer is a must!
Next, apply your foundation. There are many different types of foundation, ranging
from loose to pressed powders and from creams to liquids. Oily-faced
ladies are going to want to stick with the powders, while those of you
with dryer faces will want to go with creams and liquids. It can be
daunting to find a foundation that works for you, but I have
discovered what I consider to be the Holy Grail of all foundations:
Ultra HD Invisible Cover Foundation by Make Up For Ever ($43,
Sephora and Ulta). Use your stippled brush or a damp sponge to
gently apply your foundation. If you are going with the sponge,
remember to never use it dry. Sponges such as the Real Techniques
6
Miracle Complexion Sponge ($5, Walmart) and the Beauty Blender ($20, Sephora and Ulta) are
made to be used wet. Remember to clean them often and to change them out every 3 months or
so.
Now use concealer to hide your problem areas, such as zits, scars, and dark circles.
Your concealer should be a shade lighter than your foundation. When concealing zits, just apply
the concealer and blend it in. Use a green concealer
for best results. Yes, you heard me correctly. Green
concealer is an actual thing, and it works wonders.
Green cancels out red, so when you use a green
concealer, your zits are hidden much more so than
if you opt for regular concealer. When concealing
underneath your eyes to hide dark circles, be sure to
apply a considerable amount underneath the dark circles, down to the end of your nose. Blend
downward and outward with a kabuki brush or with your makeup sponge. This will give you a
brighter look and make you appear much more awake.
Step Three: Contour and Highlight!
Contouring and highlighting is the best way to make yourself appear bright and fresh-
faced. Until just recently, every-day, ordinary women didn’t know much about contouring and
highlighting. If you don’t believe me, ask your mom or your grandma to give you tips on
contouring and highlighting! Unless she’s a professional makeup artist or she’s been spending
some time on YouTube, I can just about guarantee that she won’t have a clue. Until the recent
development of “internet cosmetology,” even the most cosmetically aware of us just slapped
7
some bronzer on our cheeks and called it a day.
However, we are now much more aware and are thankful
for the magic that is contouring and highlighting.
First, draw your contour lines. First off, your contour—whether it is a cream, pencil, or
pressed powder—should be two to three shades darker than your skin. My favorite is The
Sculptor Contouring Face Slenderizer by Tarte ($24, Sephora and Ulta) but you can just use a
matte bronzer if you prefer. Apply contour to the top and sides of your forehead, on the sides of
your nose, and from the top of your ear to about halfway down your cheek bone into the hollows
of your cheeks. (Make a “fishy face” and you’ll see exactly where your contour lines should go!)
Be careful not to draw your contour lines in this area too high or too low, because this can make
your cheeks look saggy.
Next, apply your highlighter. Your highlighter should be two to three shades lighter
than your skin. My absolute favorite highlighter is High Beam Liquid Face Highlighter by
Benefit ($26, Sephora and Ulta). This highlighter is perfect for giving you a summery glow and
8
offers a stark contrast to the contour, making the bone structure of your face more prominent and
chiseled. Apply the highlighter to your chin, nose, forehead, and underneath the eyes. Blend
everything together with a kabuki brush or with your makeup sponge.
Step Four: All about the Eyes
First, fill in those eyebrows! Eyebrows can make or break your entire look.
Unfortunately, many women don’t consider their eyebrows when applying makeup. Bad,
misshapen eyebrows can make you look sad, mad,
tired, or old, so don’t ignore them during your
makeup routine! Start by having your eyebrows
professionally waxed or threaded for the most flattering shape possible. After that, it’s pretty
easy. Just fill in your brows with a pencil or gel, making light, upward strokes with the grain of
your eyebrow hairs. My preferred eyebrow pencil is Anastasia Beverly Hills’ Brow Wiz ($21,
Sephora and Ulta). Stick with the natural shape of your brows for the most natural look possible.
Lightly apply concealer underneath and above the brows with a concealer brush to blur away any
harsh lines. Don’t get too anal about your eyebrows matching exactly. Eyebrows are sisters, not
twins!
Next, choose a color for your eyeshadow. Eyeshadow, in my opinion, is the trickiest
part about a beauty routine, as there are many different eye
shapes and colors that must be taken into consideration. For
instance, if you have deep set green eyes, you’ll want to stick
with neutral tones such as golds and deep browns, or perhaps
you will want to take a more daring course and opt for some
9
plum-colored tones. If you have hooded brown eyes, you will want to choose lighter tones with
darker tones in the crease to brighten and shape your eyes. Remember that not every woman has
the same style. Some prefer to be glitzy and glamorous, while others crave a more natural,
effortless look. I advise that you experiment with different brands and colors to determine what
best suits you and your style.
Now, apply the eyeshadow. After you decide on a color palate, you’re going to follow a
tried-and-true method of applying eyeshadow. For this method, you will need four different
shades of the same color of eyeshadow. These four shades should consist of a highlighter (not
the same highlighter you used with your contour—for this highlight, you will want a very light
beige or white shadow), a shimmery shade (or just pale if you prefer a more matte look), a
medium shade, and a dark shade. Here’s a step-by-step
guide for achieving this simple look:
1. Apply an eyeshadow primer or concealer on the entire eyelid.
This will not only make your eyeshadow more resilient, but
will make it appear brighter and more pigmented.
2. Apply the medium shade on the entire lid up to your brow bone
with your shadow brush.
10
3. Blend the dark shade on your outer lid inward, creating a
gradient look. Also apply this shade in your crease.
4. Apply the highlighter above your brow bone and in the inner
corner of your eyelid.
5. Apply the sparkle or pale shadow on the center of your eyelid.
Blend everything together with a clean shadow brush.
It’s time for eyeliner! Of all the methods of lining one’s eyes, I have to say that my
favorite is the “winged” liner, but there many different adaptations of
this timeless look. Do not, I repeat, do not use a crayon or pencil liner
for this look. It will smudge all over the place and you’ll end up
looking like a toddler went to town on your eyelids with his black
crayon. Your best bet is to use a gel liner with an angled brush or a
liquid liner for a clean, precise line. I use Kat Von D’s Tattoo Liner
($19, Sephora and Ulta), which is a liquid liner. All of Kat Von D’s
products make me feel like a badass anyway, but this eyeliner rocks my
world. Seriously—I can’t rave about it enough. When doing your
eyeliner, remember to relax. If you’re a perfectionist like me, it’s easy to get frustrated when the
lines aren’t even or when they smudge. Use a Q- tip to clean your lines up if things get messy.
Also remember that practice makes perfect, and the more you experiment, the better you’ll get at
“winging” your eyeliner.
Lastly, apply your mascara. I have tried many mascaras, and my number one favorite is
the Buxom Mascara Bar ($22, Sephora and Ulta). Not only is Buxom’s formula flawless, but you
get to choose your brush! Whether you want full lashes or long, wiry ones, Buxom has a mascara
11
brush that will fit your explicit needs. Before I apply the mascara, I like to use an eyelash curler
for a more dramatic look. After curling your lashes, apply your mascara in three coats. For the
first coat, coax your lashes inward with the mascara brush. For the second coat, paint each lash
with the tapered end. Finish with the third coat by fanning your lashes with the brush. If you
want an even more intense look, sweep on some baby powder with a Q-tip between each coat for
longer, thicker lashes. Add one more coat for good measure and you’re good to go!
Step Five: Love those Lips
To top it all off, choose a lip stick/lip gloss/lip stain. For
many years I avoided putting anything on my lips at the risk of looking
too “done up” as if I were wearing stage makeup. Even after all of the
research that I’ve done on makeup application, I’m still not keen on the
over-drawn, Kylie Jenner inspired lips. However, I’ve learned that
there are plenty of options that allow for a natural, yet stunning look. I
have recently discovered Tarte’s Lipsurgence Matte Tint ($24, Sephora
and Ulta) in “Exposed.” This color literally goes with anything, and
since I like a bolder eye, it offers a pretty color for my lips without
being too over the top. Also, it tastes
minty. I just love it.
However, some of you might prefer a more understated
eye with a bold lip. I’ve rocked this look before, too, and my
favorite red lipstick is NARS’ Scarlet Empress Lipstick ($27,
Sephora and Ulta). My favorite thing about this lipstick is that
12
it does not wear off easily. With a natural color, I don’t mind if it wears off a bit but there’s
nothing worse than faded red lipstick. If you love red lipstick and want to avoid looking like you
just ate a red popsicle halfway through your day, invest in this high quality lipstick by NARS.
Step Six: Be Fabulous
Now that your look is finished, the final step is to simply be comfortable and confident.
The whole point of makeup is to accentuate what you love most about yourself, so don’t use it
just to hide the things you hate. There is absolutely no shame in loving makeup and cosmetics.
Conversely, you should never feel obligated to wear it, either. Ladies, whatever you do or don’t
do when it comes to your beauty routine, do it or don’t do it for you. Whatever your makeup
routine is, from the most basic to elaborate, have fun with it and use it to love yourself in the
process. And don’t ever let anyone tell you how you should look or feel about your outer
appearance! Believe that you are beautiful whether you skin is bare or all dolled up. So be sure
of yourself whether you’re going to the grocery store or the club—because confidence is sexy!
13