1
Essential Makeup Tools & Brush Utilisation – Makeup Artist
Having the right tools in your professional make up kit is a very important
requirement. With the right tools you will see the difference in your makeup
applications immediately and the results will speak for themselves.
The two main brushes makeup artists use in their kits are natural haired and
synthetic. But how do you know what you use for each product. I will explain below
NATURAL HAIRS – Used for powder products, i.e. face powders, powder
highlighters, eye shadows. Some natural hair brushes include –
Blue Squirrel, Pine Squirrel, Canadian Squirrel, Weasel, Horse, Goat, Water Badger.
You ideally want to invest in more expensive brushes for the eyes, due to the most
expensive brushes having the first cut of hair which means it is super soft, and will not
irritate the eyes. After this, once the hair has been cut and is blunt, the next piece of
hair is allocated to another brush, but this will be harsher due to the cut already
taken place.
Natural hair has a tapered end to it.
SYNTHETIC – Used for any product that is moist/waxy. I.e. cream blushers, cream eye
shadows, concealer, foundation, lipstick, gel liner and gloss. These days you can get
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
2
some absolutely fantastic high quality synthetic haired brushes which are super soft
and will not irritate the eyes.
You will get a much better finish and flawless application for powder eye shadows
with a natural hair brush.
ATANOMY OF A MAKEUP BRUSH SHOWN BELOW.
Below are a few brushes that I recommend as must haves for your professional
makeup kit:
Foundation brush - This can be a flat headed brush, kabuki, beauty blender or
stippling brush. My favourite is my Sigma F80 Kabuki Brush, this really buffs the
foundation right into the skin and the result a flawless finish, this type of brush will
give you a medium to full coverage. For a sheer coverage use a stippling brush.
Powder brush – For dusting away excess powder after you have set you makeup
with a power puff. Or stippling on powder to set your makeup. (NEVER SWIPE) Use
larger powder brushes for larger parts of the face and smaller brushes for nose, chin
and eyes.
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
3
Blusher brush – For the application of powder. If you would like to apply cream
blusher I recommend to use your fingers then buff around the edges with your
foundation brush afterwards
Contour brush – For shading and sculpting the face
Brow/Lash brush – Great for grooming your brows and keeping them nicely in place.
Can also be used for the lashes, to define and separate after mascara application.
Disposables can also be used for this.
Big and small fluffy blending brush – Amazing for creating the perfect smoky eye, this
blends all the shades together so you do not get any of those harsh lines. I also like
to use this brush for applying translucent powder around the nose and eye areas.
The small blending brush is perfect for applying highlighters into the inner eye and
blending products into the socket area and lower lash line.
Concealer brush – For applying concealers to areas of the face in which you feel
need that little bit more coverage and for blemishes and redness. You will need
different sized brushes for concealing different areas, so having a nice mix of brush
sizes will be beneficial. Crownbrush infinity range small is also one of my favourites.
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
4
Rounded eye shadow brushes in various sizes – Applying shadow to the eyelid area
and brow area. These brushes vary in size therefore a few different sizes are
essential for different makeup applications.
Highlighting Brush – Great for adding a subtle highlight to the top of the
cheekbones.
Lip Brush – Crown brush do some fantastic lip brushes. Be sure to have a range of
different finishes, i.e. pointed and square.
Eyebrow Brush – For filling in the eyebrows and adding definition.
Eyeliner Brush – For applying gel, creams and liquid eyeliners.
Below I have listed some great brush brands for you to have a look at
• Kryolan Premium Brushes – www.kryolan.com
• Royal Langnickel – https://beautyuk.royalbrush.com/
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
5
• NARS - http://narscosmetics.co.uk/en_GB/brushes
• Bdellium Tools - https://www.cocktailcosmetics.co.uk/brand/bdellium-tools
• Crownbrush UK – www.crownbrush.co.uk
• Makeup Academy – www.muastore.co.uk
• Sigma – www.sigmabeauty.com I buy my Sigma brushes from Amazon as the
shipping is much cheaper than using the sigma site as this is US based.
• Real Techniques – These can be purchased from Superdrug & Boots
• Adesign Brushes – These can be purchased from Cocktail Cosmetics (link
above), I have a range of these in my kit and they are very good quality and
reasonably priced. http://www.cocktailcosmetics.co.uk/search/adesign
• Zoeva Brushes - http://www.love-makeup.co.uk/zoeva-m-100.html
Below are a few other essential tools which you will need for your professional
make up kit (see also kit building module)
• Sharpener
• Eyelash Curlers – A must for opening up the eyes
• Tweezers
• Scissors
• Tissues
• Wipes
• Makeup Sponges
• Brush Cleaner
• Duo Eyelash Glue
• Disposable mascara wands, lip wands and spatulas
• Cotton wool pads
• Mixing palettes
• Beauty blenders – optional
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
6
• Anti-bacterial hand wash
• Hair pins to keep the hair from the client’s face
• Powder puffs
• Brush Holders
• Brush Stand
CLEANING YOUR BRUSHES
Your makeup brushes if looked after correctly can last 10-15 years. You will need
70% IPA Alcohol to clean your natural hair brushes in between clients. For synthetic
brushes when on a job you can use eye makeup remover but the remover has to be
the one with the separation in with the oil and water (be sure to shake it first). This
cleans your synthetic brushes very quickly and much better than 70% IPA will. This
will remove the stains much better and stop the brushes from fraying. You can use a
cotton wool pad to pop the remover on then clean your brush. (Same for natural
hairs. Spray the cotton wool pad with your IPA.)
Such as this eye makeup remover from Lancome for synthetic brush cleaning on jobs
When cleaning for a deep clean overnight, use baby shampoo and luke warm water.
If the water is to hot it can melt the glue. Hold the brushes down when cleaning, you
do not want the water getting into the ferrule as it can cause bacteria which can
make your brushes smell. When all your brushes are clean leave them lying down
with the end of the brush hanging over the edge of a table (pop them on top of a
towel also), this helps the air circulate around the brush for even and faster drying.
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist
7
Copyright Sarah Baldwin Professional Make Up Artist