A Photographer’s Guide to Makeup
Many photographers, especially those of the male persuasion, have no idea how to
apply makeup or what makeup adds to an image. With so many photo processing
tools available, is a makeup artist even necessary? Why not simply remove blemishes
and add color in Photoshop?
As a makeup artist, I hear these questions all the time. My goal here is to talk about
when you should hire a makeup artist, versus trying it yourself or fixing things in
Photoshop. I also give a brief overview of the various components of makeup and
how they come together to enhance (or conceal!) your subject’s features. It’s great
information in case you can’t hire a makeup artist and want a better understanding of
what she would have done as you try to fix the problems in Photoshop.
The Role of a Makeup Artist
The makeup artist you work with should be your
partner in crime in getting great images. It’s her job to
understand the final purpose of images that are being
taken (wedding? senior photo? fashion magazine?)
and to help you achieve that. However, her main job
is to make sure the client, model, or talent looks as
good as possible so you have a head start on creating
memorable images.
A makeup artist is especially important if you’re
shooting video. There’s a reason why Jon Stewart and
Barack Obama never go in front of the camera without
makeup on, and it’s that today’s HD film exposes every
wrinkle, pore, pimple, and blotch. While such blemishes
are easy to remove on a still image, they are much
more difficult to fix in a moving picture. It is far easier
to have a makeup artist even out skin tone and cover
blemishes beforehand than to try any fancy tactics on
the computer afterward.
A makeup artist is also crucial for controlling shine.
A person quickly grows shiny under the hot camera
lights, and you don’t want to realize while reviewing
your film that the subject has suddenly developed
an oil slick around frame 5,024. While you could,
in theory, watch out for shine and powder a subject
yourself, in practice it’s difficult. A videographer has
to stay focused on the making of the film; he can’t be
swooping in every five minutes to remove shine or tuck
away a stray hair.
© 2010, Digital Anarchy : Smart Tools for Creative Minds | www.digitalanarchy.com p.1
A Photographer’s Guide to Makeup
In contrast to video, still photography is much more forgiving when it comes to
makeup. If you’re photographing only men (and are not shooting an Emporio
Armani ad or some other fashion-heavy image), you can get away with just
concealer and powder, or even nothing at all, and perfect the skin later using
Photoshop and plug-ins like Digital Anarchy’s Beauty Box. I do recommend
using powder, since shine is harder to remove post-picture than localized
imperfections like pimples and scars.
If using a makeup artist is optional for men in still shots, how about for women?
Here, the heuristic is completely different. When photographing a woman, the
rule is: Always hire a makeup artist.
This is not because women are worse-looking and somehow need more help
than men. Rather, it’s because there is so much opportunity to make women
look fantastic using makeup in ways that are extremely difficult for Photoshop
to mimic. For example, makeup can make a woman’s eyes pop, add depth and
contour to her features, and in general, make an otherwise ordinary-looking
woman appear stunning.
Here is one example I am particularly proud of:
I dare you to try doing that in Photoshop.
An often-ignored role of makeup is the confidence boost it gives your
subjects. Women who feel beautiful, look beautiful. I’m often amazed at the
transformation in a woman’s smile, posture, and carriage after having her
makeup applied. Even though digital photography is in some ways a numbers
game, a confident subject will increase your percentage of shots that are
promising.
© 2010, Digital Anarchy : Smart Tools for Creative Minds | www.digitalanarchy.com p.2
A Photographer’s Guide to Makeup
The Basics of Makeup
Now that we’ve covered when you should hire a makeup artist (i.e., always
except when taking still shots of men, and even then consider it), let’s move on
to the basics of makeup. The goal here is not to teach makeup application – for
that, you would need books or a personal lesson in makeup. Instead, it’s to give
you a grasp of the terminology and tools of makeup so that you can effectively
collaborate with your makeup artist on set.
Base
A makeup artist will start by applying base (foundation, primer, concealer, and
powder). The purpose of base is to smooth out the complexion, reduce redness
and shine, and conceal under-eye darkness, wrinkles, and scars. A good base
is especially important in video, where blemished skin is a nightmare to correct
retroactively. Tools like Digital Anarchy’s Beauty Box can help, but it’s not a
replacement for makeup done right in the first place.
When applying base, a makeup artist will often start by putting on primer,
a clear gel that fills in pores and enables makeup application to go on more
smoothly. Then, foundation is used to even out skin tone and create a clear
canvas for makeup. I’ve found that on older subjects, powder foundation can
settle into pores and accentuate fine lines. I prefer to mix liquid foundation with
water (to make it more sheer), and then apply concealer where needed to cover
spots and blemishes.
Many makeup artists will use a separate concealer for the under-eye area and a
drier, more concentrated one to cover spots and blemishes. One of my favorite
tricks is to use a highlighting pen on top of concealer to add radiance to the
skin. This can do wonders for brightening aging skin:
p.2 © 2010, Digital Anarchy : Smart Tools for Creative Minds | www.digitalanarchy.com p.3
A Photographer’s Guide to Makeup
When a makeup artist is done with the base, he will set the concealer with
powder. This prevents the powder blushes and shadows from grabbing onto
creamy spots on the skin.
Cheeks
I like to apply a neutral bronzer along the temples on both women and men to
define the bone structure and to give the illusion of more defined cheekbones. A
highlighting powder can also be swept right on top of the cheekbones to create
more dimension. On women, blush is blended over the bronzer to create a soft,
natural flush.
Eyes
Using shadow, eyeliner, and mascara, a skilled makeup artist can really bring
out the color and accentuate the shape of your subject’s eyes. Unlike evening
out skin tone, applying eyeshadow in when post-processing video is extremely
difficult if not impossible, so hiring a makeup artist can make a big difference
here. With stills, it’s not too difficult to do it in Photoshop on a single image, but
getting it to look consistent between different shots may be tricky. And, again,
don’t underestimate the confidence that can come from feeling beautiful with
makeup on.
Eye makeup is often especially striking on women with light eyes and features.
Here, purple shadows and liner are used to define the model’s green eyes:
I often think of applying eyeshadow as a way of faceting a gem (the eye) for
maximum brilliance. Here, too, shadow is used to contour the subject’s eyes
and reveal depth:
© 2010, Digital Anarchy : Smart Tools for Creative Minds | www.digitalanarchy.com p.4
A Photographer’s Guide to Makeup
As a part of the overall eye look, a makeup artist will often define the brows. I
like to use a pencil to lightly color in strokes, and then use a powder to soften
the look.
Lips
Lips can be defined using lipstick, lip pencil, gloss, or all three. Depending on
the look that you are going for, the lip color can be the center of attention or
tie in a monochromatic look. Lip color is also the easiest aspect of makeup to
change on set, so if you want to take several shots with different wardrobe,
lighting, or set, having your makeup artist change the lip color can be a quick
way to complement the new setting. You may be surprised at how changing
from a neutral to a bold lip color can instantly alter the mood of the makeup.
How It Comes Together
In my work with photographers and videographers, makeup is typically not the
focus of the image or film. I am rarely asked to transform the subject into a
runway model or an Orc, but rather the most beautiful, confident, and classy
image of themselves: the Vanity Fair cover version. What the audience doesn’t
see (the under-eye circles, the blemishes, the double-chin) is just as important
as, if not more important than, what they do see (the striking eyes, the porcelain
skin, the expressive mouth). Creating memorable images is about the overall
effect, and makeup – as much as lighting, setting, subject, and retouching – is
an essential part of the process.
Esther Tsai is a Bay Area makeup artist specializing in photography and video. You can
view her work and contact her at her website, www.esthertsai.com.
p.4 © 2010, Digital Anarchy : Smart Tools for Creative Minds | www.digitalanarchy.com p.5