BBBRRR III DDDEEE
M A K E U P G U I D E
Meet Trena
Award-winning, Pro Makeup Artist, Trena Olfert has 15+ years in the wedding and beauty industry
from YYC to YVR to the Canadian Rockies. Trena started her career with skin therapy and happily
transitioned into a Professional Makeup Artist within a couple short years, running a successful company
with a collective team that provides makeup services for weddings, elopements, fashion, commercial and
corporate. For the past 8 years, Trena has been coaching others with her Professional Makeup Artist &
Business Program and is currently transitioning this to an online model to continue to coach and mentor
aspiring artists to build their successful portfolios, brands and entrepreneurship.
table of contents
04
MEET TRENA
05
TIPS + TRICKS
08
INSPIRATION BY TRENA
Trena’s Tips+ Tricks
When considering a profressional makeup artist for your big day, it’s important to pick someone who has
years of experience with all skin types, skin concerns and everything in between. You want to ensure your
makeup artist also understands different types of weather and any other surprises that may happen on your
wedding day. Choose someone who will make you look and feel flawless while still acheiving your dream
look whether you’re opting for a more natural look or something a bit bolder like Hollywood glam!
TIP #1
We usually suggest a wedding makeup trial
appointment closer to the wedding date when the
other details have come together. At the trial, you’re
looking to achieve almost the exact look for your
wedding day. Are we dealing with exhausted skin?
A random breakout or excessive oiliness? These
are things we can assess at trial and how to properly
amend on wedding day. I am always a fan of trying
new things and making a decision together. After
your trial, wear your makeup out, take selfies and
decide if this is the look you want for your big day.
Anything we need to tweak can be changed on the
day of your wedding.
TIP #2
Healthy skin is something to aim for, however, you don’t need to obsess about
attaining it before your wedding day. This is not the time to be trying new
treatments; those should happen at least 6 months out.
Not sure where to start? Try including hydrating, oxygenating and supportive
facials to further build collagen, increase hydration and plump up skin before your
your big day. The right combination of the above can help create a smooth canvas
instead of severely dehydrated and flaky skin. Your makeup artist should be able to
assess and troubleshoot any skin situation. If your makeup artist does not offer these
services, ask for local esthetician recommendations to achieve these goals.
TIP #3
Understanding product ingredients and what they can do not only for your
skin but longevity of your look is a must. We work with our own makeup
line and trust other products from certain suppliers. We explain ingredients to
our clients if they have sensitive skin, allergies or dry eyes. You want to find a
makeup artist that knows and understands ingredients to avoid putting you in
an uncomfortable situation. We prefer ingredients that have zero fragrance, less
junk and preferably no parabens.
If you have skin sensitivities, be sure to let your makeup artist know!
Inspiration by Trena
Choosing your makeup look can be intimidating and we feel
your wedding day look should resemble you with a little bit of
glam. If you don’t usually wear tons of makeup, that’s okay! Be
upfront and honest with your makeup artist about what you
want. If you’re after a more natural look, understand you still
need makeup for photos, but the makeup can be simply for
enhancing your natural features while boosting complexion.
Maybe you want to add more fun to your look, like a smokier or
sultry finish. We want to make sure nothing over powers your
skin type, face and eye shapes.
We are showcasing three of our favorite wedding day looks
to provide you with some inspiration to create your very own
signature look for your big day!
APPLICATION ON RHEA
After assessing Rhea’s darker hair tone and olive skin, we found that she looks
beautiful in dusty tones of golds and champagnes. We chose pink tones for her face,
but exercised caution as anything too red can mimic acne and inflammation on the
face. We completed a soft sultry eye with stronger matte tones on Rhea. We used a
matte powder blush and matte contour highlighter to avoid any of her oily areas to
look extra shiny and “sweaty.” Her lips are dusted over with pink gloss and lipstick
combined to create a stain finish, and her brows are softly filled to fill in gaps.
Rhea’s Final Look
APPLICATION ON MIMI
Mimi has curly hair and fair skin. I gathered as she is young and
wears glasses, her eyes may be prone to extra sensitivity. We went
with the No Makeup Look and chose muted, matte tones to create a
blushing cheek using a matte blush worked into the contour. Mimi
has fabulous brows to play with, so we filled them in with a couple
shades of matte brown shadow to fill them out more and have them
compliment her hair tone and glasses. We applied a beautiful taupe
lipstick to finish this neutral no makeup look.
Mimi’s Final Look
APPLICATION ON BREE
After assessing Bree’s flawless yet very fair skin, we chose soft tones of
champagne, peach and sand to give her eyes a pop of colour. We knew we wanted
to finish this look off with a deeper lip tone of berries to awaken her fair skin.
We completed the brows with a soft brown to give them shape and match closely
to her hair root tone. Her cheeks were complimented with an extra rouge matte
blush to pull together the bolder lip tone.
Bree’s Final Look
@JESSICA.CATHERIN
CALGARY | ROCKIES | VANCOUVER
@LISACATHERIN
MOBILE MAKEUP + HAIR
ONLINE MAKEUP TRAINING
TRENALAINE.COM | @TRENALAINEMAKEUPCOMPANY
CALGARY AND BANFF
WEDDING VIDEOGRAPHER
@lauraannacinema | lauraanncinema.com
t i m e l e s s & r o m a n t i c
calgary, alberta
greylilyphotography.com
@greylilyphotography