5 Secrets to Prepping Your Skin for Flawless Makeup
There’s more to great-looking makeup than finding a
foundation formula that offers the exact color match, coverage
and finish you want. The proper preparation makes a world of
difference, and it starts with the ideal skincare regimen.
Cleansing and moisturizing are imperative before you reach for
your cosmetic case, as they help create the ideal canvas for
foundation and all other makeup that follows.
Step 1: Cleanse
If you’re diligent about removing your makeup and cleansing properly at the end of the day,
you probably don’t need to wash the traditional way when you wake up—but you still want to
start the day with a clean slate. A ph
enomenal micellar water such as Vichy’s Pureté Thermale 3 in 1 One Step Solution removes any
leftover skincare product, excess oil and perspiration that may have accumulated overnight so
you can start your skin’s day off right.
Step 2: Hydrate
All skin types need moisture, especially if you don’t want your foundation to settle into lines
and look cakey. The secret to achieving flawless foundation is pre-application hydration to
create the ideal canvas for your makeup. All skin types can benefit from using a hydrating
serum such as Aqualia Thermal Serum. For dry skin, use Aqualia Serum first and follow-up with
Aqualia Thermal Riche Cream to help lock in moisture. Those with combination or oilier skin
may prefer a lightweight gel formulation that helps maintain moisture levels throughout the
day without causing shine or breakouts. These are our suggestions (and don’t forget the
sunscreen!)…
Dry skin: Aqualia Thermal Rich Cream
Combination skin: Aqualia Thermal Serum and Aqualia Thermal Mineral Water Gel
Oily skin: Aqualia Thermal Mineral Water Gel
Step 3: Focus on your eyes
Piling on concealer to hide signs of fatigue only makes matters worse. Instead, opt for a
treatment product with ingredients that help you look like you got a full night’s sleep—even if
you didn’t. Aqualia Thermal Awakening Eye Balm contains
hyaluronic acid for hydration that plumps up fine lines,
caffeine to help alleviate puffiness, and it also doubles as
a primer that prevents concealer from creasing. Aqualia
Thermal Awakening Eye Balm is a fast absorbing,
lightweight, oil-free gel that works great as a makeup
base as well. Now your entire face is ready for flawless
foundation…
Step 4: Refresh
The secret to long-lasting makeup isn’t reapplying… In fact, putting on more throughout the day
can lead to a streaky, caked-on mess. To keep your foundation looking its best, reach for Vichy
Mineralizing Thermal Water Spray instead. This mineral-rich mist helps refresh your foundation
and create the illusion of just-applied perfection—and the extra hydration leaves your skin
looking dewy and radiant.
Step 5: Rinse and repeat
If there’s one skincare step that’s non-negotiable, it’s washing your face at the end of the day.
Important for removing more than just your makeup, proper cleansing also eliminates the dirt,
debris and pollution that accumulate over the course of the day—and contribute to free-radical
damage. The micellar water you use in the morning is more than up to the task, but if you
prefer a deeper clean, the Pureté Thermale 3 in 1 One Step Cleanser is ideal for all skin types,
including sensitive.
Hydration is critical in the evening as well, and the Aqualia Thermal Night Spa Replenishing Anti-
Fatigue Sleeping Mask helps you make the most of your beauty sleep—and wake up to smooth,
soft, supple skin that’s ready for more makeup come morning!
Secret Tip: Exfoliate
Whether you prefer exfoliating with a physical
scrub or an acid-based peel, this step is crucial for
supple, radiant skin. Vichy’s Double Glow Peel Face
Mask offers both modes of exfoliation to remove
makeup and the buildup of dead cells on the skin’s
surface that can prevent foundation from gliding
on smoothly and evenly—and its double-peel
action helps refine skin texture and deliver
luminous, healthy-looking skin.